On the last night of my freshman year, the remaining students in Cedro dragged the bare mattresses off of their bunk beds and laid them out in the lounge. In various stages of inebriation, we sat around and retold countless stories and misadventures from the year, and finally succumbed to sleep. As it turns out, move out was at 8 am the next morning, and seconds after the clock struck eight, a whole parade of cleaning staff marched in, unceremoniously ending the sleepover. Even though I thankfully hadn’t partaken in any drinking games the night before, I still had a bad headache from the sleep deprivation. Some of us were trying to go to Great America. Some were calling Ubers to the airport. Others were still miraculously asleep through the roaring vacuum cleaners roaming about the dorm. The scattered way in which we left freshman year was the antithesis of how we arrived: all together, with welcoming ceremonies and icebreakers and frighteningly enthusiastic RAs.
Somewhat romantically, I tend to think of life as writing a story. For example, when I arrive at a decision point, all else being equal, my choice is the one that my imaginary reader would have wanted me to embark upon. Another side effect of writing my life as a story is that a bad farewell feels like ending a chapter without a conclusion. When I was kicked out of my first home away from home, sitting alone in my summer housing, I resolved to rewrite the ending. The result was a long, sappy Facebook post, where I tagged dozens of people, giving each the goodbye I felt they deserved. It’s had a tangible effect; by telling the story of how I felt during that departure, I now have a digital breadcrumb that my friends and I can use to refer back to that emotional transition.
Since coming to college, these chapters have flown by faster than ever, and getting farewells right has become both more important and more difficult. Social closeness transformed from a linear process of knowing more about the same classmates who surrounded me since elementary school to a continuous ebb and flow. Every new dorm, class, or organization involved an overwhelming number of new connections, hastily assembled prefab homes thrown into the hurricanes of academic stress. At the end of the academic year, many of these homes were torn down even more hastily than they were constructed. Airports, which previously signified the carefree excitement of adventure, have transformed into shrines in memory of the newly minted friends I had to leave behind, or, on the return flight, of my parents and my peaceful hometown. After getting through the security line, I would look back for my parents, stuck behind the glass panes separating the lobby from the terminals at PDX, and wave to let them know I was okay. I could identify with all of the goodbye hugs and kisses in the security area in ways I couldn’t before, because I felt the emotional weight on my shoulders as well.
The atmosphere at work, while certainly more calm, has still been punctuated with similar feelings. Last winter, one of my project mates at Curai announced his impending departure. The announcement was sudden and caught me off guard, much like the janitorial staff of Cedro so many years ago. Because I slink quietly out of the office each day, he nearly missed my departure, and only got my attention as I was walking by the dumpster to my vehicle. Shortly thereafter, the official company wide announcement was circulated with his last day in the office. And so I braced myself for another farewell, working together (read: watching him work) on a gigantic SQL query, one final data pull to analyze his last project.
For some reason, Curai is filled with a remarkable number of intense runners (alternatively, “runnerds”). We frequently run a trail loop called the Bay Loop, which is shortened to bloop in typical Silicon Valley fashion. On one of these bloops, one of my coworkers related to me how their parents approached parenting, describing it as analogous to an archer firing an arrow. In order for the arrow to travel far and straight, the archer must pull back with great precision and force on the bow, but crucially, they must let go, letting the arrow gather speed and travel on its own trajectory. We’ve all been arrows, and I think most people would agree that this makes total sense. Most people in my age range aren’t archers yet, but in every “I would do this differently than my parents” conversation, we’re weighing the bow in our hands, and seeing how it feels.
But there is another scenario in which we are all archers: our friendships. At the end of the day, our time with our friends is limited. Some people move, and everyone changes. When close friendships inevitably fade, “saving” the friendship can certainly be the right thing to do, but it can also be the equivalent of an archer holding onto an arrow instead of letting it go. Even before the goodbye, few people think of friendships like an archer: pulling back the bow in such a way that the arrow travels far, rather than hoping they will never need to release it.
On the last full workday with my coworker, we had a handoff session for our project. For practice, I explained the project from top to bottom, while my coworker pointed out gaps or incorrect information in my understanding. When I had things mostly under control, he would turn his attention to his computer, where I noticed he was searching for boxes for wedding rings. All of a sudden, I started thinking like an archer. What felt like a sad farewell for me was really a release, an arrow set free along its trajectory: he would finally propose to his longtime girlfriend, and on his return from his holiday trip, start a new job that more adequately suited his career aspirations. Much in the same way no archer mourns the loss of an arrow, I felt my sadness evaporate.
This was right before holiday break, so naturally, another airport was involved. It could have been the goodbye on top of goodbyes: not only did one of my close teammates leave, but I wouldn’t have the company of my other coworkers to commiserate with. Wrapping up this unhappy chapter a tragic ending would have been easy. But that’s not how archers see airports. Of course, they see the tearful goodbyes at the security line. But they also see the ecstatic greetings of those waiting at the arrival gate on the other side. On every plane, family members, friends, and occasionally even fans with banners stand by to welcome all of us arrows, released from one airport to another, with open arms. I sit at home now, reading and learning from the work my teammate submitted on his last day, so that I can carry it forward in his absence, and it feels far more like the start of something than the end.
I have had the immense privilege of seeing the musical Hamilton, a stunning display of choreography and storytelling through lyrics. On its surface, the musical is a celebration of its eponymous Founding Father, but through the character of Eliza Hamilton, Alexander’s wife, its true motivation is revealed as a statement about the importance of stories in preserving legacies. After Hamilton’s death by duel, Eliza dedicates the remainder of her life to maintaining his narrative by establishing the first private orphanage in New York City in Alexander’s memory and understanding and disseminating his works. By ensuring the preservation of Hamilton’s thoughts in history, Eliza allows future generations to understand and learn from him, and turn the farewell into a new beginning.
“Hamilton”, then, isn’t really about Alexander so much as it is Eliza. After the play, I visited her Wikipedia page, and read a bit more about her life, something I never would have done had I not seen the play (this begs the question, if a Wikipedia page exists but no one is around to read it, does it make a sound?). I discovered that not only did Eliza read her husband’s writings, she petitioned Congress to publish them, and that “the writings that historians have today by Alexander Hamilton can be attributed to efforts from Eliza”. So even as Eliza immortalized her husband, Lin Manuel Miranda brought Eliza’s hidden story into the light through his musical, and inspired the curiosity for at least one theatregoer to dig a little deeper.
In my Facebook post four years ago, I pasted a quote from The Life of Pi by Yann Martel: “I suppose in the end, the whole of life becomes an act of letting go”. Especially with the current pandemic, it has become painfully evident just how far the world can pull those we are close to at a moment’s notice. In the midst of this unending attrition, it’s clear to me that storytelling serves a greater function than just resurrecting the dead. It’s also the assurance we the living need as archers, as arrows, and as airplane passengers holding one way tickets: no matter where we go, there will be people waiting at the gate to receive us and to carry our lessons onward.