“This meeting has been ended by host.” I sit there, blankly.  These days, my laptop embodies so many stressful things. All of my doubt about my career, my future, all the people I should be emailing but am not, the rejections, the code sitting around unwritten, the stickers reminding me of who I once was. Zoom calls with my friends briefly transform my machine into a window of happiness, acceptance, and spontaneity, the cold metal trackpad becoming a little softer, more comfortable. Yet when they end, I realize that sudden silence can be more jolting than sudden noise. Sudden silence jolts something a little deeper within, a little more painfully. I’m in the twilight zone between feeling okay and feeling bad enough to say, “Can you hang out a bit longer, just because?” Standing up from my computer, I briefly scan the cold, sky blue walls of my bedroom, feeling the weight of my expectations settling back in. Closing that laptop lid is a small kernel of loss. For a long time, loss blindsided me. At the end of each college year, I’d find myself sitting in some Airbnb, with far too few people and far too much space, looking for ways to fill the void. Trips would end suddenly, even though I knew the departure date from the very start.
Of course, one of the miracles of being human is being adaptable, and I found my adaptation in anticipating loss and attempting to minimize it. Like a forensic investigator, I started imagining the loss in my mind, and traced it backward to its cause, looking for a cause of death and a chance for resurrection. A friendship, lost, because I had my nose too buried in work. A career path, cut short, because I wasn’t diligent enough about learning. I would identify the cause of death and run from it, as far and as fast as I could. Sometimes I can’t run away. Blizzard, my dog, is getting old. I try and imagine what it will be like when he’s gone, imagining the word “goodbye” over and over again until it is just letters and hardly a word at all. 
“Hey!” I yell. “No food.” Blizzard is slow to his feet now, and sleeps most of the day, but magically comes alive to beg for table scraps. He may not sprint frantically in circles like he used to (a behavior my sister affectionately terms “maniac mode”), or chase cars, or go on walks longer than a couple blocks, but as soon as dinner starts, he’s transformed into a puppy. He’s a standup comedian with one routine, and it works every night. First, he rears up on his hind legs, barking at the TV. When we get annoyed enough to beckon him over, he comes by the table and sits (one of two tricks he knows) by my dad, the person most likely to give him scraps. Then he barks or whines, interrupting the conversation as much as possible, until he gets scraps. Rinse and repeat. Sometimes, I just let him bark, because I know I’d do anything for a bark once he’s gone. I’ve run the scenarios in my head, imagining what it would be like once he stopped taking the staircase, stopped walking, stopped barking, stopped. It felt to me like I was about to move out of a house after many years. I wanted to get all of my belongings, because there was no coming back.
“You have to carry him up the stairs now,” my dad cautioned. I had just returned from a week long trip, and I missed it. His last staircase. I looked at him, almost accusingly, of ruining my plan to say goodbye. An artifact had been lost that I’d never get back. I had visualized it, stressed over it, even written about it (see the story “Pages”), but life was indifferent. Later that day, I hear him whining in the other room, and I see him pacing around at the bottom of the stairs. I hoist him into my arms, careful not to pressure his arthritic leg, and lift him up.
Another day, another quiet, stress-filled work session at my computer. It’s just after sunset. I look up to see Blizzard, in his nightly ritual of sitting expectantly again at the bottom of the steps. My mom is napping upstairs, and my dad is working in his office, so for a moment, it’s just us, here in the fading light. Pushing my chair out, I stand up and start heading over to pick him up before he starts whining. He briefly regards me, then unexpectedly runs up the stairs. At the top, he pauses for a moment, as if he’s about to turn around to look at me, before quietly slinking into the master bedroom. A smile flits across my lips. It flickers within me, somewhere a little deeper, a little more meaningfully. The glow from my computer screen, so harsh and analyzing before, is imbued with a bit more promise, and I loosen my grip on the perfect goodbye, and the four walls around me stop inexorably closing, instead protecting me from the cold winds swirling outside, enclosing the life my parents built for my sister and I, this slice of heaven where I can hop into a warm bed with my stuffed narwhal, where notepads and my favorite pens are scattered around every room, where delicious food is passed across kitchen tables, and where, most gratifyingly, I can walk by my parents’ bedroom and hear quiet snoring from both of them and Blizzard, dreaming together in a primordial silence.
For me, becoming an adult is more about the jobs that are thrust upon us than the ones we choose. One such job is being a bricklayer of our happiness. I can only take one action at a time, and that action adds one brick to my house. I’m realizing that what I thought was a single house was really a neighborhood, a house of today, of tomorrow, of when I move, get married, retire, and that I’ve spent every moment so fixated on preparing for loss, a home so far away that the ones I live in every day have fallen into disrepair. This perspective has shown me how important it is to build positive experiences for my day-to-day life, as opposed to designing only for a future self. That realization has already quieted a buzz in my ear, the one we all get when something is bothering us, but we haven’t shone a spotlight onto it yet, haven’t driven it out of our mental attic. The bricks, all different shapes, colors, sizes, lay in a mound in front of me, and a row of houses, all beautiful in their own unique way, stretches out to the horizon.
