Since leaving home and no longer having consistent access to a TV, I’ve watched many fewer full sporting events. Instead, I eagerly consume highlight reels of basketball games and tennis matches, reliving multi-hour events in a matter of minutes. Although the experience has in some ways been cheapened, I can’t help but find myself coming back again and again to relive the condensed dopamine highs of these compilations. However, not all highlight reels are created equal. History books are in many ways a highlight reel of humanity (for some loose definition of highlight), and as someone who finds daily life so wonderfully complex and empowering, I find it striking that history somehow feels so bland and difficult to internalize.
By contrast, the recent outbreak of coronavirus feels anything but bland. Once contained to world news stories and the occasional frightening call from my relatives in China, it has landed in the US, with the first community transmission coming in Northern California, and new cases being reported in Santa Clara County along with potential exposure by a parent in Palo Alto only hours later. A recent article in the Lancet (Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study) has suggested that the virus will not end with the current outbreak: “Independent self-sustaining outbreaks [of 2019-nCoV] in major cities globally could become inevitable because of substantial exportation of pre-symptomatic cases”. Thus, the emerging consensus among epidemiologists is that the most likely outcome of this outbreak is a new seasonal disease—a fifth ‘endemic’ coronavirus. […] ‘cold and flu season’ could become ‘cold and flu and COVID-19 season.’” says The Atlantic in “You’re Likely to Get the Coronavirus”. The severity of this persistent virus, according to the article “Experts envision two scenarios if the new coronavirus isn’t contained” in StatNews, could range from common cold symptoms to being somewhere between the flu and SARS. If that is the case, then we will all see a transformation of the COVID-19 outbreak from a single acute occurrence into a seasonal staple that we will all experience from time to time. On the flip side, our treatments and vaccines will likely be much more advanced for all following COVID-19 seasons, and our concern for the disease will fade from public view. In this world, the effects of the novel coronavirus become muted but permanent.
History exists on a timeline, oftentimes with the official start and end of an event marked down to the day. If there were a future chapter written about this season’s coronavirus outbreak, it already would have started. From that standpoint, it’s become clear just how different historical events are when experienced from within, and how much is left out of history. As someone working in healthtech, it feels like an abrupt instantiation of vague company quarterly goals and abstract mission statements into the real world. Meetings feel imbued with an additional sense of urgency, and a run of the mill all hands session quickly transforms into a coronavirus discussion. “Will hand sanitizer kill the virus? Should we stock up on food and water? Is it more deadly than the flu?” The doctors are there with answers, but it doesn’t shake the general sense of unease in the air, invisible as the disease we’re discussing.
Outside of work, people are no less engaged. “This coronavirus stuff is freaking me out, and I don’t feel like doing anything in life at the moment,” a usually upbeat friend texts. “I’m not as worried about the disease itself as I am about the quarantine, “ says another. Others are hyperaware of their health, even for previously unconcerning symptoms like a scratchy throat. Group messages have become RSS feeds for the latest CDC releases and supply stocking lists abound. Epidemiologists will study the disease and one day provide guidelines on how we should or shouldn’t have prepared for this event, and open the Schrodinger’s box of whether only the best prepared doomsday households will make it through the outbreak unscathed, or whether this will become a study in public health panic, with grocery stores shelves emptied only for the looming cloud on the horizon to part, leaving people to save their stocks of canned beans for the next disaster. But the box is closed, and we are all in the pet store, wondering if we should buy cat food.
“The reality is that there is little point ‘preparing’ for most of the catastrophic scenarios some of these people envision. As a species, we live and die by our social world and our extensive infrastructure, “ says the Scientific American in the article “Preparing for Coronavirus to Strike the U.S.”. It goes on: “In contrast, the real crisis scenarios we’re likely to encounter require cooperation and, crucially, ‘flattening the curve’ of the crisis exactly so the more vulnerable can fare better, so that our infrastructure will be less stressed at any one time.” By flattening the curve, the article refers to individuals making personal efforts to minimize contact with other people to, if not stop transmission, slow it down so that hospitals can have more distributed load over time and better treat those who are severely affected and need in depth care. According to the article, by thinking on the community level in our individual actions, we can significantly affect the R0 (number of people infected by each person who’s been infected) of coronavirus and improve outcomes.
The concept in the Scientific American article is already being applied to strengthen our response to the virus. People lean out to support those who are more panicked with careful explanations of the facts behind the sensationalist headlines or emotional assurance where facts are missing (which, at the moment, they often are). More than before, communities demonstrate community, paying attention to the sick and the elderly, conserving and sharing resources with one another, and making personal sacrifice to better the world around them. In this way, a new vaccine procedure won’t be the only permanent fixture from the outbreak. The way groups of family and friends band together in this moment to be mutually supportive in ways they haven’t before will have innumerable small and not so small positive domino effects down the line.
The current articles on my blog, and likely most future articles, go through an extensive editing process before they ever see the light of day, but this one is different. I don’t have any real sense of what the coronavirus will bring, and I deeply hope and believe that I will look back on this article and wonder what I was so concerned about. This article is, more than anything, intended as a snapshot taken before full information is available. That’s the part history books are missing: people standing on uncertain ground, believing things that are incorrect under the unreasonably discerning perspective of hindsight, squinting into the future, and setting up the support networks to handle whatever comes over that eternally inscrutable frontier.