Poor memory is an integral part of my life. It means my friends must serve double duty as external memory storage banks. It explains why I feel more comfortable texting than talking in person. It’s why I worry more about my second impression than my first. The thing is, those of us with poor memory don’t just blissfully float around in our ignorance; we observe the dark void of that which we have forgotten with great trepidation. At the same time, I think we also spend more time wondering how our brains have chosen to allocate their precious memory capacity.
When I categorize my memories from long ago, they fall into two main buckets. The vast majority, I recall similarly to the “Personal Life” section of a Wikipedia page. I know rationally that certain quarters of school were easy or hard, I know when I moved, or when I got a dog, or when I met certain people, and so on. I can derive these memories from outside sources, and they are rooted in objective truth.
There are other memories, however, that don’t fade over time. The whole scene is still clear, and I can recall small details, like who else was in the room, the time of day, and the weather. Many of these memories actually become more vivid as the years pass. Why this strange subversion of normal forgetfulness patterns? The simple answer is that these memories likely began with a kernel of truth, but have grown more and more embellished or distorted over time. Researchers have extended this phenomenon to induce false memories in people through a variety of social psychology techniques. So, memory is no unchangeable ledger. It bends to serve outside masters, and given that most of our time is not spent in social psych research labs, the main master it serves is us.
That begs the question: what does it mean for our memories to serve us? Similarly to most people, I don’t sit around in my alone time recalling memories for fun (if you do, I would be very interested to hear what types of things you remember!). Instead, my memories are surfaced largely during storytelling, either for my internal reflection or to other people. For example, when I am asked why I switched out of premed, I frequently a story about a late night sophomore year. One of my dormmates, Lauren, was writing on the hallway whiteboard. Usually, this board contained innocuous bonding questions, like “What’s your favorite dessert?” On this night, it was a bit less lighthearted, adorned instead with a detailed description of the Krebs cycle. As soon as she finished drawing it out, she briefly consulted her textbook, erased the entire board, and began drawing it again. As I was walking by, I commented on the diligence of her exam preparation, to which she made some sort of comment that she needed to get 100% on the exam. The story then goes that this was not a path that appealed to me, and so I switched out.
This story, as much as I enjoy telling it, has little or nothing to do with my actual decision to switch. My limited storage space doesn’t allow me to maintain the vast complexities of countless phone calls, of wavering back and forth for months, of the heavy weight of career path permanence, and the academic pressure of trying to keep as many doors open as long as possible. My brain instead opted to land that mosaic of thoughts on this memory, imbuing it with importance and meaning, growing it into a chapter in my life story. So these memories are kernels in another sense as well: they represent the compression of high dimensional emotions and feelings into a low dimensional imagined experience. I’m able to see some of the dim context for this memory because it was only a few years ago, but when I look further back, into middle or elementary school, only the kernel itself remains.
This leaves me with a couple takeaways. One is the importance of thoughtful storytelling. The way I represent my life journey changes the way I remember it, which in turn changes future retellings. It’s important to recall our origin stories as truthfully as possible, because our confidence and resiliency comes just as much from what we remember about ourselves as what actually happened to us. As the torch of memory extinguishes with time, it takes more and more effort to do some exploration with it, to try and cast some light on the corners and crevices of our bright, clear, and incomplete stories. I think it’s an effort worth making.
The other takeaway is about the origin of such long term vivid memories. A lot of them don’t involve anything out of the ordinary. Just a classmate, working on a whiteboard. I am sure I passed that identical scene in a hundred other contexts, and no longer remember them. The reason the memory was elevated was because I was going through a period of change and growth, a period that needed to enter my life story, and my brain had to pick a place to do it.
Many of us are understandably worried about the loss of our early twenties. This period of time was ripe for adventure, for taking risks, for making memories that last a lifetime. Reflecting on my long term memories in this way has helped alleviate some of that sadness. Perhaps, if we focus on writing chapters in our life stories, the memories will take care of themselves.
