Writing, in some sense, feels to me as an act of encapsulation. I observe something. I feel emotions, frayed at the edges, fractals which spiral for as far as I care to dive into them. Then, I sit down and tie those threads together, trashing some that seem off topic, blending others together. Roland Barthes divided writing into two types, writerly and readerly texts. The readerly text is like a rollercoaster: the reader is along for the experience, within the guide rails crafted by the writer. The writerly text brings the reader into the construction of the coaster. Where do we place the curves? the writerly text asks. The reader is invited in, to derive the meaning of the work, rather than simply having it told to them. As an inexperienced writer, I find myself a primarily synthetic force, ingesting writing from sources ranging from published novels and essays to code reviews and text messages. It all goes into a big blender, and I try to look at it as a writerly text. What is the point of all this? How does this text message relate to this essay? How can I cut and paste so it all makes sense in the end and I can tie a bow on it?
Chanel Miller’s memoir Know My Name, about her experiences in the aftermath of the infamous Brock Turner assault, is rousing counterpoint to this distillation of truth into meaning. It is, from beginning to end, an unabashed telling of the truth, along with all the thrash that comes with truthful storytelling. 
An analysis of a memoir is sometimes strange because to a large extent, the story is not one of pure creation. It is fundamentally connected to a life in the real world, and is thus privy to all the randomness and lack of logic that comes with that. In Miller’s case, her story is messy by definition: the aftermath of sexual assault is never a straight line. Nowhere is this more evident than in her interminably long series of court dates, where every seemingly slam-dunk case turns murky and soul crushing, and even the victories are tarnished by the bitter taste of case appeals, lenient sentences, and a lack of remorse by the perpetrator. Even the process of designing her memorial garden, and choosing a quote from the plaque, is ridden with bureaucratic frustration. The other half of the picture here comes from Miller’s agency as a writer, and the way she chooses to retell the court scenes. Here, her extensive use of simile and metaphor stand out. When the defense grills her with questions, she likens it to “stepping stones disappearing beneath [her] feet”, the tension rising “as if watching a snake begin to coil” (177-178). On the stand, her fingernails pinch each other “like crabs fighting to the death” (182). Miller makes her own incredulity with the situation palpable to the reader, trying relentlessly to explain and re-explain her thoughts as she is cross-examined, pulling the reader down her mental rabbit holes in the process. Sometimes her comparisons serve to confuse more than they clarify. When discussing Brock’s fake story, fabricated to prove his innocence, she likens it to a second grade currency system called fuzzies, and wonders “if the jury would see that his fuzzies were fake” (191). Chanel refuses to budge from a full retelling of her thought process, even if it results in an analogy that is difficult to follow, but this has a secondary effect: the reader is fully exposed to the psychological regressions involved in victims facing trauma, and can better empathize with her emotional state rather than fixating on plot details.
On a more structural level, the pacing of the story is designed to create ambiguity rather that drive the narrative toward a rising action, climax, and falling action. There is no buildup to the moment of the assault, which occurs on page 4. Before that event, Miller rushes to characterize herself, as if she is on an invisible timer. “I am shy […] I’ve always rolled my shopping cart back to its place of origin […] I’m okay with losing board games” (1). The “I” statements tumble out, with no space to spare for explanation or even sentence fluidity. Here too, the adherence to her stream of consciousness truth is evident. Her shyness is made clear in her first words, and her remaining “I” statements, of which there are many, serve as anecdotes of her shyness and agreeableness. In a logical self-characterization, the main character might touch upon several aspects of her personality, creating a more well-rounded picture of herself in the limited pages afforded, but Miller refuses. “I am shy” is not Miller’s truth. Her truth is in her anecdotes, regardless of whether the reader understands her in a well rounded way or not. Once the introduction is over, the assault happens. The event, which many people beginning this memoir might expect to be the climactic moment in it, passes with hardly a whisper. When the deputy asks if she is feeling okay afterward, she thinks, “Yeah, should I not be?” (5). It is an exhibit the reader yearns to understand with more clarity, but Miller ushers us past. It is not her truth. Her truth comes in outbursts, seemingly sprouting out of nowhere as she waits for her endless series of court dates to arrive. When her boyfriend Lucas arrives to visit her in Rhode Island, she timelapses through their moments together. “I showed him my route to school. I showed him how incredible it was how much I sweat. I showed him the print shop and walked him through every step I’d learned” (84). With repetition she fast-forwards the reader to her next setpiece, a random stranger asked her to get in his car. “ARE YOU FUCKING CRAZY WHY WOULD I EVER DO THAT, [she says]. My voice was so flighty and high-pitched I hardly recognized it. […] I remember how quickly his smile evaporated, like a drop of water on hot pavement, how fast he turned the wheel and accelerated away (85). Miller slows the pace to a crawl, directly quoting herself, recalling memories in vivid detail. On the next page, she assures the reader of her healing: “you are allowed to be cautious but you don’t always have to be afraid” (86). For a moment, the reader understands. Miller, the protagonist, has confronted her demons and achieved catharsis. But only ten pages later, another car passes by her, the men inside casually harassing her, and she “[walks] into the middle of the empty street, [clenches] her fist, [throws] back [her] head, and [starts] screaming” (95).  In her choosing of events for the memoir, she did not choose to create a steady sense of character development, and for every moment of clarity and understanding there is another one of regression and confusion.
Fittingly, Miller continues this nontraditional plot style through the end. “Do not become the ones who hurt you”, she implores (328). Yet, even this simple statement is ridden with conflicts. She criticizes the defense attorney for attacking her and her sister Tiffany in court, but then turns around and pokes holes in Brock’s case, telling him he cannot claim to be an “inexperienced drinker and partygoer” (281). She spends a large section of the book firmly claiming that the extent to which she (or anyone) parties is not relevant to sexual assault behavior, but also steps into the logic of Brock’s side to critique him. The reader of any story hopes in the end to see a glimmering character, forged in the trials of their experiences. Indeed, even the cover, with its depiction of kintsugi, the Japanese art of repairing cracks with gold, seems to point toward this interpretation. Miller emphasizes that she is not a perfect angel, and indeed, who could be, given the circumstances. Her intentional pause to critique Brock’s case for four pages, after his sentencing had already been decided, adds gravity to her character, and remains consistent with her telling of other parts of the story. At the end of the book is her victim impact statement, a piece of writing from a past Chanel still trapped deep within the void of her legal battles. The Chanel at the end of the story has assuredly more perspective and wisdom than the Chanel of the victim statement, yet that is how Miller closes her book. She doesn’t want the reader to have a perfectly tied together experience. “Healing is not about advancing,” Miller learns. “[It] is about returning repeatedly to forage something” (323). So, even in the waning moments of the book, she leads the reader back, to remind them to forage rather than closing off past chapters of their life.
With most stories, the writer is trying to lead the reader somewhere. Look at this landscape I have created for you, the writer says. Or in the writerly novel case, look at what we have created together. In Know My Name, Miller chooses to ask neither of these questions, putting on no airs of a puppeteer constructing a scene. “Actually, I was hoping for a lighter topic,” she quips (315). Her writing intentionally removes agency from the writer Chanel, trading it for the truth of past Chanel. “Trauma provides a special way of looking through time; years fall away in an instant,” she reflects (157). She pulls her readers through this time tunnel and at the end, returned to the gentle light of the present day, “[dusts herself] off, and [goes] on” (328). Where does that leave us, the reader, in her absence? I think it leaves me with an appreciation of the thrash in our lives. When projects at work are started, then deprioritized. When plans are made, then moved. When one morning we wake up, ready to seize the day, and another we can scarcely crawl out of bed by noon, for no apparent reason. More importantly, it encourages me to be patient when others are thrashing as well. When a friend can’t make up their mind, or excitedly has a conversation one day and drops off the face of the earth on the next day. When people switch majors, or jobs, or personalities. When someone I thought was on the path of recovery relapses back into an emotional rut. This thrashing can be intensely draining; it is hard to measure an upward trendline in a jagged scatterplot. I try and rationalize my world in stories with flowing narratives, but Miller gently nudges me elsewhere; at the end of the day, there may not be a meaning underlying it all, just the truth, and that is enough.
