The line to Dinkelspiel Auditorium was long and filled with strangers, and I was starting to curse my past self for so recklessly throwing my comfort into the brisk night air in the name of making plans. This was Breaking Ground, an annual Stanford dance event showcasing the various student dance groups on campus, ranging from traditional Southeast Asian dances to tap dancing to hip hop. Dance showcases in college are interesting because dance is rarely anyone's main agenda. Most of the people on stage have never performed dance prior to college and just picked it up on the spot. The end effect of this is that witnessing a friend appear on stage performing feels akin to uncovering a secret life of theirs, a whole set of passions and interests rarely exposed during the daily academic hustle and bustle, and there are few things more gratifying than discovering that.
Thus, for the past few years, despite never having been onstage  myself (to the benefit of everyone), dance shows had always been on my must-attend list of college events. But this year's Breaking Ground felt different, as a graduate. Gone were the days of rolling out together from dorms and reserving entire rows in the auditorium, cheering non stop because of familiar faces in every group on stage. Only one friend remained, and it would be their last quarter performing. Even though the atmosphere was electric as all of us streamed into our rows, I couldn't help but feel the somber undercurrent of a farewell in the background.
The lights dimmed. "Any freshmen in the crowd today?" the emcees asked. The general din of people finding their seats unified into cheers from all around. "Sophomores? Juniors? Seniors?" At each mention, I couldn't help but feel more excluded. I shrunk meekly into my seat, relieved as the first group of dancers came onstage and the music began. Even here, I could not find salvation, as the customary college tradition of yelling "I SEE YOU" followed by the dancer's name took hold, and roommates, RAs, and friends of those onstage began making their visual acuity unnecessarily clear, at times even drowning out the tower speakers bracketing the stage.
Sitting amidst the crossfire of hip hop music and excited screaming may not seem like the ideal location for introspection, but I found myself reflecting on past years, on the Peter who came here in between academic commitments to cheer on people he actually knew  - who, for a brief window of time, fully belonged in everything that was unfolding before me. I thought about my classmates who used to sit in these seats beside me, rather than the ocean of strangers I now floated in, and the pictures and videos I would take so I could show the on stage stars later how wonderfully they did, and that, no, we couldn't tell when they missed a beat getting to the right position on the floor in their second act.
Then it happened. A timeline moment.
I live most of my life in three dimensions. This does not mean I'm not aware of time; it's hard not to stare at the clock as I wait for a slow workday to end, or jump from surprise when I realize I am twenty minutes late to an interview. The best way I can describe a timeline moment is being aware that the current moment sits on an infinitely long timeline extending backward and forward. Occasionally, and more frequently post graduation, a moment comes along that compresses time together into physical location, reminiscent of the heptapods from Ted Chiang's remarkable short story "Story of Your Life", who "experienced all events at once, and perceived a purpose underlying them all. A minimizing, maximizing purpose." A glimpse into four dimensions.
Naturally, as someone who was unintentionally falling into it, my timeline extended first into the future. Next year, I probably wouldn't be at Breaking Ground, with my runway of friends who were still dancing fading away completely. The year after that, I could perhaps be moved away, cutting free the locational rope that connected my adult life raft to Stanford. Eventually, every person who shared this campus with me will graduate and move away too. Through it all, each fall, students will gather in these cramped rows designed for lectures rather than shows and admire the incredible balancing feat now not only exemplified by the physical dancing on-stage, but also by the dancers themselves, who rush off to practice between problem sets and office hours and still manage to keep (mostly) sane lives. They will cheer with their dorm and their friend groups, and afterward, perhaps they'll still grab dinner at The Axe and Palm or crash a dance group after party later.
This wasn't an entirely new feeling. It was a thought I fell back on repeatedly throughout senior year, converting all of those "lasts" into "other students will still be engaging in these shenanigans next year", which was the emotional equivalent of using pain to mask the feeling of an itch. What was new this time was the timeline extending in the other direction. Waves of students in years past, some of which were the first to stand up and yell "I SEE YOU", engraving their contribution into the psyche of all future dance shows. Rewinding further, students created dance groups and in doing so, established institutions through which countless people they would never meet would have life changing experiences and form long lasting friendships. This past timeline was the origin story for what I saw, in front of me, today.
I stumbled upon this timeline moment. The combination of the familiar, nostalgic environment with the vast change caused by college - an organization with an incredibly high turnover rate - were ripe conditions for this dimensionality reduction. This type of moment, where a similar scenario exists like a long standing gateway, through which people from the past and the future can pass, actually only encompasses one type of timeline moment. The other is much more common: moments contained within the personal timelines of our own lives. The number of people affected by personal timelines moments shrinks from an uncountable number to just one, ourselves, but the impact of a personal action like making a friend or finding a job we enjoy can have incredible and difficult to comprehend effects on our own timelines through repeated domino effects.
Thus, every day, we all encounter many such moments, moments with a past and a future, but hardly give a second thought to the invisible dimension of time. With some mental effort, however, we can turn these into timeline moments. Recognizing and stretching timelines for timeline moments more often is more than an interesting mental exercise. Many looming present day thoughts erode away in this new perspective. Work deadlines and social drama are stripped away of the scary guise furnished upon them with our present panic, and shrivel into the blips in time they actually are. On one level, recognizing timeline moments can provide a sense of calm zen underneath the choppy variance of daily schedules.
The most interesting part to me, however, is where timelines can amplify rather than erode. Recently, a couple of alumni from the organizing team for Treehacks, Stanford's collegiate hackathon, set up a brunch to have a meet and greet with all of the new and old people of Treehacks. There were many fun moments, ranging from all of us sitting in a circle and passing down infamous Treehacks stories to excited conversations between the new frosh (cheekily called saplings) and the "wise" graduated people (adding the quotation to accurately describe myself). From the present point of view, it was just a regular moment. I got to mass produce pancakes, catch up with old friends, and reminisce about funny stories for a few hours. Then I stepped back into the slanting afternoon sunlight, got in my car, and drove back to the normal equilibrium of my day.
In the timeline, though, this moment was so much more than a brunch. It was a propagation and enhancement of culture. Just as brunches in the past had helped me meet the old classes of Treehacks when I was a sapling, now brunches would help me meet the new saplings, and as long as people enjoy holding brunches, the magical dumb stories of Treehacks from years past will survive beyond the faded memories of whoever happened to be on the team that year. Every year, any cultural tradition faces a difficult survival curve, but with each year that passes where someone puts in the effort to revive an old tradition, no matter how small, the tradition stands a better and better chance of becoming structural, which is where the real impact starts to happen.
Unfortunately, the bullet points of resumes, flashy portfolio websites, and Github contribution charts will always encourage a transactional mentality toward daily work. The reward feedback cycle for these bullet points come quickly at first, in the form of interviews, offers, and connections. Yet to me, that gold-star glazed treadmill of feedback never quite feels the same as hearing about hackers who met their significant others on the Uber ride to Treehacks from the airport, or my friends who have transitioned from the colored stage lights of Dinkelspiel to dancing as a hobby and continuing to have bonding experiences with dance groups even now. Stretching the timeline of every moment, or even most moments, is both exhausting and unnecessary, but taking the effort to do it more often can help make life a bit less stressful, and occasionally, when we're lucky, redirect the arrowhead of our life direction somewhere a bit more positive.
Of course, when my friend came onstage, I cheered and screamed, and for a moment, I faded back into the wave of the present. I was no longer a graduated outsider. I could fit in with everyone else. But even when she disappeared offstage to make way for the next group, I also got caught up in cheering for all the new dancers, for the freshmen who came here and started anew, for the graduating seniors, tearful as they received their goodbye roses, per the annual tradition of Common Origins, the dance group that hosts Breaking Ground. They were more than strangers, they were all contributing and part of a timeline that I was lucky enough to witness.
As the final set began, I noticed a scratch in my throat: the result of too much excited screaming during the performances. It was a familiar feeling, but to tell the truth, I didn't expect to feel this way at my first post-grad dance show. As I was trying to figure out what had just happened, I remembered the tagline of another dance group, Legacy, printed in the program booklet: "Over time its members will come and go, but all of them will leave their own legacy, in the form of knowledge and passion for dance, for future generations of the Stanford Dance Community." This played out in all the performances that night; even though my friends had graduated and moved off campus, they were still on stage in the footsteps and facials, in every "I SEE YOU" and "THAT'S MY ROOMMATE" from the crowd, in the formation changes and the beat drops.
The two and a half hours passed all too quickly, and the final notes faded out to darkening stage lights. The dancers, now reduced to silhouettes, began jumping in ecstasy and hugging each other in celebration of a perfectly executed show. And although I knew they weren't there, I could imagine my dancing classmates in those featureless shadows, soaking in the applause of adoring crowds from the past, now, and many, many years into the future.
