Dear Peter, June 2020:
I know you love calculating things out, trying to predict things about the world, and about yourself. I know you’re looking forward at the next year with trepidation and nervous hope, dimly sensing some great and terrible events over the horizon. It’s nothing you’re not ready for. I’ll even spoil it for you: it all turns out okay.
It turns out okay, but not because you successfully predicted the future. No, quite the opposite. You will quit your first job in the middle of a pandemic, without a clear idea of what you’re doing next. You’ll scramble at the last moment for funding to return to a master’s program you thought you’d left for good. You’ll move from home to live from a suitcase and a couch to work with a cofounder who suddenly had other plans. You’ll wake up at 5 am every morning for weeks on end, wide-eyed, wondering what you’re doing with your life, and with all the gifts you’ve been given. And you’ll get into your first relationship. You’ll tell her that all the existential stress, the financial instability, the isolation, had all been worth it, just to meet a girl like her.
When you say that, you’ll believe it.
Reality is a succinct teacher, and one of the first lessons it provides is that it doesn’t know who you are, or what you believe. It stands steadfastly, unapologetically: a mountain range blocking your highway. You’ll try and construct your own reality, seeking approval from VCs for your startup ideas, focusing on passing accelerator interviews instead of talking to customers. You’ll try to spend more time on your hobbies, telling yourself that perhaps more balance in your life will destress you, but it doesn’t help. You’ll even try and change yourself, for her. You’ll keep trying that right up to the moment she breaks up with you. There are a thousand different ways you could try to create your own reality, but in those thousand worlds, there’s always a mountain range, and there’s always a highway.
By the way, things turn out okay. I know you forgot that part already.
As a small sapling in the world (yes, that’s what you are), lessons from reality are raindrops falling from the sky. You can let it water you, absorbing it into your veins, standing up taller with your newfound turgor pressure, or let yourself drown in it. You’re going to have days where the rain is just rushing down and it’s all you can do just to put roots down into the soil and keep yourself from being swept away. Just brace yourself, and absorb.
Even on the darkest of days, you’ll find that the torrent of water rushing over you helps you realize what keeps you in place. You’ll discover the joys of being a nomadic couchsurfer. You’ll learn just how much you love salsa, chess tournaments, tennis, and brown sugar boba. You’ll internalize the importance of being a positive part of the stories of others, the pure joy of being a part of the “Acknowledgements” section, of accidentally calling old high school friends and hearing them recount how you got them through chemistry, eight years ago.
It all turned out okay because you realized that reality was watering you. And you know what else you eventually realized? When you told her, gliding down the highway 101 north, with the dying embers of the sunset fading out overhead, that all of this was worth it, just to meet someone like her, you were right. You just didn’t know why.
I’ll let you figure that one out for yourself.
~Peter, June 2021