I didn’t expect to find myself at home again one year later, but in many ways it makes it easier to reflect. Back then, I was busily packing for a celebratory Japan trip, only days after an emotional move-out and graduation. The Peter one year ago was intensely hopeful, but also filled with fear. One year later, I’m sitting at the same desk, surrounded by the same walls and bookshelves. So, what’s changed?
I think if I were to ask the graduating Peter what he was most afraid of, one of his main fears would be losing his close friends. I think his fears were justified in some respects and wrong in others. I do spend less time interacting with my college friends now. It’s hard to overestimate the mental space occupied by a 40 hour workweek (more for most new grads) and the strain it puts on scheduling and social energy. The types of friendships that were least affected roughly fell into two sections: those where the friendship already consisted largely of doing nothing together (or something already necessary, such as eating), and those that had a large digital component. The big change is that friendships start to lose a sense of liveness over time, in the sense that conversations become less about what is happening right now and more asking about how someone’s day went. That’s sort of the inevitability of spending most eventful daylight hours at work, where I’m plugged into Slack instead of iMessage. Many friendships also change from interacting on a continuous basis to periodic catch up sessions. All this goes to say that I have realized the importance of not being dogmatic with what counts as a good friendship and what doesn’t. Or perhaps, that it is important to be dogmatic in ways that are not as dependent on interaction frequency. On the flip side, spending my most eventful hours of the day in the office means that oftentimes, coworkers are the primary people who can provide me emotional support in a relevant way. From that perspective, it was critical for me to exist in a workplace where I felt a close connection with my coworkers, and I feel really lucky in that respect. I still have no idea how to assess that during recruiting, however. I used to see friendships as balloons that I would need to remember to hold on tight to, lest they fly away. Now, especially in the Bay Area, I think a more accurate picture would be beach balls floating in a pool. Even people I haven’t spoken to since graduation are often surprisingly close by, and everyone is a text or Facetime call away. Paths cross and friendships are reignited without much fuss, and that’s relieved a lot of the pressure off that I previously felt.
The other fear I had before was being unable to drive myself outside of work hours. A lot of life goals, naturally, fall outside the walls of the office, but would I have the energy or discipline to pursue them? That was my concern. When I started work, to be honest, I didn’t have much time outside of work hours. I worked a lot, then generally socialized a bit and went to sleep. Looking back, some of that was due to the learning curve of being a full time software engineer for the first time, but a big part of it was mistaking raw effort for learning and growth. One of my coworkers recently commented that practice doesn’t make perfect, perfect practice makes perfect. Looking back, my practice certainly wasn’t perfect. This led to a tough cycle of spending a ton of hours at work, followed by being frustrated by my progress as an engineer, coupled with not having many other emotional outlets because all my time was spent in the office. It’s much healthier and sustainable to set good boundaries around working hours to diversify emotional investments, which is a piece of advice that gets parroted around a lot, but actually putting it into practice is tough without feeling like my career goals are being compromised. The way I came to a bit more peace with this advice was to change my focus from simply finishing my work to finishing it in a timely manner that permitted me space elsewhere. Progress in that dimension, the speed of work rather than hours spent at work, turned out to be much harder to measure, and there were weeks where I’d feel I was slowing down rather than improving, and it was hard to pinpoint the reason. Sometimes, it was hard to see how the slowdowns were of any fault of my own. In this pursuit of work efficiency over effort, I think one mental hurdle I slowly worked my way over was distinguishing between patience and complacence. I used to see slow weeks as a grave threat to reaching my career goals, and would start spending extended hours trying to compensate for my perceived pace issues. This led to sloppier work and even more frustration. Gradually, I started to take slow weeks in stride, quieting the alarm bells that used to ring in my head when I couldn’t finish a commit in a day or got stuck fixing test suites. On the other hand, in my past impatience I often became more complacent. I think questions about whether one is working in the right industry or whether their growth is on the right trajectory are important to always be asking, especially because it’s much easier to have a narrow perspective in a single workplace with one group of static coworkers. At the same time, questions about industry and growth only make sense once I understand how the industry works and what growth means, both dimensions that I don’t feel confident in yet.
So, I stopped working the long hours I did when I first started. Putting that time after work toward what I had originally planned turned out also to be a big hurdle. Working on side projects and continued learning will never be as immediately gratifying as reconnecting with an old friend over delicious food. Because of that, I think it’s important to hold one criteria of after-work growth above all else: how energized are you to push it forward? Clearly, it is important for self-driven efforts to be practical, perhaps even tied to one’s career. However, in my experience, meaningful self-driven efforts take a long time to materialize (patience, not complacence!) and a practical reason doesn’t get me out of bed on Saturdays to work on a side project. It has to be emotional. In the same vein, it will never feel like the right time to work after work. It can also be framed in that way: what do you run off to work on even when the conditions aren’t perfect? Another piece of this puzzle was not underestimating how many side tracks I could have running in parallel. While I was just working and sleeping, it felt as if work easily engulfed all the hours I had in the day, and there was no possible way to do anything else in addition to it. Then I started writing and working on side projects, and each of those took up substantial time each week, but my work wasn’t significantly impacted. To an extent, tasks take up the space they are allotted, and working while thinking “I have nothing else going on today except work” compared to “I’m going to finish this in the next hour so I can go write” is a different mentality that helped me become a better engineer and still gave me the space to do other things. So to answer original Peter’s concern, I’ve made some progress in that respect, but there’s a long way to go.
I also learned about a few things that past Peter wasn’t even thinking about. One of the biggest things that I realized continuously over the course of the year was that my capacity for empathy and understanding was very skewed toward my age group. I can’t even count all the moments at work where I witnessed a discussion between two coworkers and made totally inaccurate assessments of how they felt, because my prior was how people who acted like that felt during college. A lot of these discrepancies seem pretty obvious when listed out, but it took me a while to internalize and I am still occasionally surprised by my internal mental calibration. In general, everyone is more detached from their discussions than I was used to. I frequently misinterpreted coworkers as frustrated or harboring some sort of inner grudge when, in reality, they had long forgotten or disregarded the event I was remembering. I think it’s a result of the disproportionate role work plays in the lives of new grads compared to the rest of the adult population, so work related disagreements feel bigger than than they would to someone who goes home to a family and some dogs that need to be fed and played with regardless of how bad or good a day of work went. This really manifested itself when people left for other companies. For me, each of these departures were pretty soul-searching moments, shaking my faith in the company I was working for, causing me to worry that I was somehow myopic in my decision to stay. Yet, whenever I spoke to those headed out, the answer was often as simple as “the commute was too long” or “it didn’t make financial sense at the time”. In hindsight, those are pretty obvious answers, and much more likely than some sort of deep-seated disbelief in the mission of the company, but it took me a while to get used to.
This next point is less actionable, but I now feel that it’s quite difficult to predict what will have the biggest impact on your future life. If I was asked to predict that a year ago, I think a relatively safe answer would be my decision to become a software engineer. Only a year later, it’s already much less evident what matters and what doesn’t. If I had to reassess now, I would say that software engineering has influenced and will continue to influence my financial situation, as well as growth in knowledge. But taking up running will have long term impacts on my heart health and, in the context of distance running, my emotional fortitude. Running has also brought me closer to people which have in turn introduced me to other activities and other people, and I’m sure that will continue the longer I run. Writing has given me an outlet to express thoughts and indulge in imagining and creating fiction. Perhaps someday that will culminate in a novel and that will be my focus instead of software engineering. It’s not likely, but in the long run, it’s hard to predict. Even more to the point, the coronavirus outbreak will likely keep me home for the better part of 2020. That’s a period of time I spend in my hometown with my family that I never would have had otherwise. More than just personal impact, the response by the government and people around the country to coronavirus has broadened my understanding of the different backgrounds and perspectives of people across the country (mostly in a sort of “I wish I could unsee this” sort of way, to be fair). Finally, coming close to the present day, the Black Lives Matter movement has spurred me to learn more about the country I have been a resident of for so many years, and understand and face difficult social issues in ways I hadn’t before. Understanding American society and the history that brought us to our current conflicts and divisions, and even more importantly, kindling the desire to further engage and learn could easily be the main formative force in my life when all is said and done.
Looking forward, I have two main concerns I hope that future Peter will feel better about than I do currently. One is a fear of stagnation of personal identity growth. College was certainly a big step in this direction, striking out on a computer science journey when I had pretty much never done it before, and maintaining a stable set of friends largely based on my internal value compass. On the other hand, looking back at this year, many of my highlight moments were events initiated by other people. I was simply pulled into them. The same goes for many productive and difficult discussions at or outside work. It scares me to think about all of the opportunities for fun and growth that I miss out on simply because I don’t take the time to develop a strong personal identity and take initiative on that identity. Hopefully, when I look back next year, I’ll see a much larger percentage of my story happening because of me rather than just happening to me. The other big concern is related to career growth. Over this past year, I’ve felt a lot of intangible growth in my role, my knowledge, and so forth. Figuring out how that translates into tangible benchmarks I can point to is still a big question mark in my mind (or whether that’s even important). I don’t have too many doubts that I’ll keep learning and becoming a better engineer over the course of this next year, but I’m very unsure about the translation process from my inner understanding to my external workplace environment.
Finally, a note about college. As many of my coworkers will tell you, I still talk about it a lot to them, very fondly, sometimes in a way that displays an inability to let go of the past. “It seems like you’re just chasing a high,” one of them remarked. I still have trouble pointing out exactly why. It feels to me a moment frozen in the past, filled with many of the fondest memories I have had the pleasure of experiencing in my entire life. Was it the place, or the people? Was it the shared set of circumstances of being a student, or just chance? How much of it was my mentality during that time, and if a significant part of it was internal, how can I recreate that now? More importantly, is holding onto those memories and comparing them to my current situation vigilance against complacence, or a sign of immaturity? Whatever the answers to these questions might be, for now, I accept that college formed a disproportionately large percentage of my identity development, and thus, a lot of the storylines of my life that began there still have great influence on me today, and I think by and large they still lead me to the right place. Perhaps it’s a skin I will shed once I construct my identity from a more stable base in the future.
Last year, at graduation, I wrote: “I know we’ll look back four years from now at all the things we’ve done, all the experiences we’ve had, and we will be just as proud and reflective and filled with purpose and meaning as we are now”. I didn’t really believe it when I wrote it, but after a year, I feel much more confident in the validity of that passing thought. Before, a lot of the purpose and meaning I found came from the chaos of college. During my interview process to organize Treehacks (the ultimate chaos), I remember mentioning that I was good at putting out fires. Focusing on immediate, urgent problems was a larger part of my identity than I originally gave it credit for. I think I’m much more at peace with the fire-less environment I stand in now. Once the fires are gone, the long process of reimagining and bringing the vision of a more meaningful life can start. I’ll always glance at the firefighter jacket in the closet of my memories with warmth in my heart, but that’s where it’ll stay (for now!).
