Last weekend, I drove down to move my stuff out. It’s a ten hour drive from Southwest Washington to Palo Alto. I had meant to move down the week before, but curfews were instantiated in multiple Bay Area cities that would make it hard to move my furniture into storage in time, so my dad and I had to delay the move date. I didn’t pack much (all my clothes are down there anyways), but I did bring my notebook, and a pen. One of my creative writing teachers, when proofreading my class’s work, would always comment on parts of a story that he felt a lot of “heat” from. “I really feel a lot of heat from this character,” he’d say, splaying his palms as if receiving it from a real campfire suddenly materialized between us in his second-floor office of the Creative Writing department. I anticipated a lot of heat on this drive, visiting the Bay Area for the first time since the police brutality protests and shelter in place began. Hence, the notebook. I think one of the biggest lessons I got from this trip is that heat is hard to forecast, both how much of it you’ll get, and where it comes from. When it comes, as unpredictable as a breeze, you better be ready to hold out a kite and start unreeling.
The notebook did end up with some scrawls, my poor handwriting exacerbated by the shakiness of the car. Soon, I hope to scrape together some time to share those thoughts. Today, I want to write about a different part of that drive, a part I completely did not expect to be writing about. Dreading the ten hour ride home, I implored a friend for suggestions to stay awake. “You should listen to the podcast Serial if you haven’t before,” was the response. So I did. I am not a binger, but when I was stopped at gas stations refilling, I couldn’t wait to get back in the car and hear more about the case. If you haven’t checked out Season 1 yet, please do before you continue here. The rest of this post will be one thorough and gigantic spoiler for Season 1.
Listening to Season 1 of Serial was completely engrossing at first because of the action in the case. Sarah Koenig, the intrepid amateur detective, sifting through mountains of ancient court evidence to find hidden gems. Adnan, now behind bars, never failing to maintain his innocence for 15 years. The whole cast and crew, brought in for interviews about not just Adnan, but also their high school drama, their lies, their hidden grudges against each other. It felt surreal, a work of crime fiction transplanted into real life. Sarah is like a kid in a candy shop, eagerly digging through even the mundane details of cell phone tower mechanics and how long it would take to drive from Woodlawn High to Best Buy. She frames herself much as she frames Christina, a bulldog on the pant leg of justice. By the end, it feels like Sarah is spending more time convincing the world why Serial should exist at all rather than arriving at any sort of justice. She’s right, Serial should exist. She just has the wrong reasons.
Sarah mentions that “obsession is maybe too strong a word” for her attitude toward Adnan’s case, but if it’s not that, it’s something close (Episode 1). Sarah is called onto the case by Rabia, a friend of Adnan. She asks Sarah to simply take a look at the Adnan case, clearly seeking justice for Adnan, believing he is innocent. Sarah immediately makes the case her own, stating that “by the time I left Rabia’s office that first day, I understood only one thing clearly, though maybe not the thing Rabia and Saad wanted me to understand” (Episode 1). After inviting Sarah to the case, Rabia doesn’t reappear back in the season until the last episode. Despite admitting to the audience that she’s “not a detective or a private investigator,” or “even a crime reporter”, she convinces herself that she will solve the case, saying at one point, “If I could help get to the bottom of it, shouldn’t I try?” (Episode 1). Her obsessiveness prevents herself from seeing outside the flimsy walls of the Clue game she’s constructed for the show to live in. When Asia mentions to Sarah that she believes Adnan is innocent, Sarah excitedly brings this news back to Adnan, only to be met with sadness. It’s too late, Adnan explains. Adnan doesn’t live in a Clue game, where someone believing his innocence will magically pull him from his jail cell. “I see what you’re saying, I hadn’t thought about it that way,” says Sarah (Episode 1). It’s not clear if Sarah ever really sees, however. Sarah spends an inordinate amount of effort looking for Hae’s family, to provide a statement on Hae. “In my twenty plus years of reporting, I’ve never tried as hard to find anyone,” she says. They never get back to her, to which she responds, “My guess is they want no part of it, which I respect” (Episode 9). It’s never clear why she wants to find Hae’s family, and its unsurprising that the family of the victim wants nothing to do with her. Even Adnan himself, presumably with the most to gain from Sarah’s investigation, has doubts. “What’s your interest in this case, really? Why are you doing this?” he asks. Sarah has no answer. "You’re a really nice guy, I like talking to you,” she replies. To this, Adnan replies with one of the most memorable quotes in the entire season:
“To be honest, I feel like I want to shoot myself if I hear one more person say, ‘I don’t think you did it because you’re a nice guy, Adnan’ You wouldn’t know that but I’ve heard people say that to me over the years, and it just drives me crazy. I would to hear someone say ‘I looked at the case and it looks kind of flimsy.’ I would rather someone say ‘Adnan I think you’re a jerk, you’re selfish, you’re a crazy SOB, and you should stay in there for the rest of your life, except that I looked at your case and it looks a little off, and something’s not right” (Episode 6).
Adnan has no illusions about what matters and what doesn’t when it comes to justice, and he is clear about that to Sarah throughout the podcast. At the end, Adnan brings up his doubts again: “So if you don’t mind me asking, you don’t really have no ending?” (Episode 12). In the final episodes of the season, it’s clear Adnan is tired of indulging Sarah’s fairytale, saying “at this point, it doesn’t matter to me how your story portrays me, guilty or innocent. I just want it to be over” (Episode 11). In his final clip on the podcast, he asks her to simply present the facts for the viewers to make their own decisions regarding his innocence. But Sarah has not gotten this far by being realistic. She is still living in her world, so, of course, while “[she] appreciate[s] Adnan’s blessing to take a powder, [she’s] not going to” (Episode 12). It’s her justification for the entire escapade. To come out the end without a verdict, Sarah would need to admit that it was all for naught, and that in many ways, her “undignified” search for facts brought little but refreshing traumatic memories for all parties involved (Episode 1).
Despite all of this, Serial is an incredibly illuminating view into the vast complexities of being human, and particularly of trauma and its far reaching tendrils. In Serial, trauma stops time, like amber freezing an ancient bug in place for eternity. Sarah foreshadows this when she notes that “if some significant event happened that day, you remember that, plus, you remember the entire day much better.” (Episode 1). The amber from Hae’s death adhered to everyone differently. Rabia keeps all court documents from fifteen years ago in her car, always keeping them ready at a moments notice for some surprise court hearing or appeal. Adnan reflects constantly on having friends that “could imagine that he’s capable of killing Hae, Adnan spent 15 years thinking about that. And then trying not to think about that” (Episode 6). Hae’s family’s refusal to engage with Sarah also reflects their feelings succinctly. Even Sarah, who is investigating the case, is surprised at how Adnan is still living the trauma from the murder: “That’s the prison phone system telling us our time is up. This happens every half hour. Surprises me every time, cause I often sort of forget where he is” (Episode 2). Adnan can remember vividly what it was like to walk through the halls of Woodlawn after Hae’s death, recalling that he received so many hugs that “it was just too much” (Episode 9). Small details like that ground the listener back into the timeframe Adnan is frozen into. When referring to Krista, Sarah mentions that "Hae’s death was the defining event of her youth” (Episode 9). Others have moved on completely. The detectives Ritz and McGillivray both definitively, almost dismissively brush away Sarah’s inquiries. Will, one of Adnan’s track friends, “[doesn’t even know that [he] was a part of anything until [Sara] just told [him] that” (Episode 4). Bringing the old and the new together feels in some ways like reviving dinosaurs and bringing them to roam interstate highways, and this all culminates in Asia McClain, who has a miraculous change of heart, and is Sarah’s main tangible impact on the legal aspect of the case. Asia’s view on upholding her affidavit seems to change as a result of this temporal crossover in a way that never would have happened had everyone continued on their time trajectories. It really begs the question of how many other people would be different if they were simply exposed to the timeframes of trauma (or of other strong emotions) that others around them are living in. Using the heat analogy from creative writing, Serial’s interviews are full of it, far wider ranging than just those about trauma, and I’m sure those who have checked it out will relate.
Sarah deserves more credit than the above paragraphs may suggest. She was self-delusional, but also self aware enough to reflect the conversations she had with those related to the case with candor and empathy. At the end of the day, all of the criticisms of Sarah’s handling of the case that I penned down were a part of the podcast Sarah herself edited and released. Without her obsession, we would never get to see the deeply human side of those who are incarcerated and the resulting impacts of crime and the resulting trial on their local community. While writing this, I stumbled across an interview Time magazine did with Deirdre Enright, the Innocence Project head in Serial, where she comments that she “never thought for a second that this would turn into some global phenomenon. It’s just bizarre” (https://time.com/3639655/serial-innocence-project-deirdre-enright/). From the perspective of a lawyer, it is bizarre that millions of people across the country and beyond would tune into a podcast about an unqualified layperson interviewing people 15 years after the case was adjudicated. Thankfully for Serial, no matter how hard it tries to be about law and justice, it fails, and in doing so, succeeds at revealing something much more universal.
