==CHAPTER ONE==
BEEP BEEP. I snoozed it reflexively. Centuries of technology, and here we were, still getting up to alarm clocks. Opening my eyes was still a nervous process for me, even though it had been a month since the incident that dropped my job tier into the dumps. Literally the dumps, separating garbage into recyclable and non-recyclable. I didn’t even wake up in a bedroom that time, just the couch next to some empty beer bottles. And a hangover. It was an interesting side effect, hangovers. The number of times I woke up with a hangover had to multiplied at least ten times since the Flipbook was put into place. After all, why not drink if you were going to wake up somewhere else across the ship the next day? Still, I tried to avoid subjecting my next body mate to unnecessary suffering in that way.
My conclusion on the alarm clocks were that they were there to enforce a sense of continuity, just like our names, which we retained even though our body switching occasionally moved us into a body with a different gender. At first, it was jarring for me to see a man saunter into the shop with the name “Diane” in pixelated lights on his tag, and I somehow felt bad for him, as if he had been transplanted from his body more than the rest of us. But we were all in the same boat, and that’s how it was designed.
Before I opened my eyes, I focused on the weight of my body against the mattress, and the weight of the blanket on my skin. I breathed in deeply. The air felt dry and crisp in my lungs, and had the faintest smell of ashes. That didn’t tell me much. Unless you ended up in a farming job or one of the bottom rung assignments, all of the work was at or near the urbanized city-like center of the Ark, which was informally designated as the Hive because of the sheer number of delivery drones that buzzed about from building to building. If I focused, I could hear some of them outside my window. Definitely in the Hive.
BEEP BEEP. I opened my eyes, turned off the alarm, and opened the nightstand display. It read:
Your Flipbook assignment for today is drone control firmware engineer.
You have the following objectives:
1. Complete your assigned programming tasks.
2. Give a metrics update to Mary from product.
3. Help your coworker Lucas debug their memory leak issue.
After work, you need to:
1. replenish the groceries in your fridge according to the grocery list there.
2. Clean the upstairs bathroom.
3. Call a repairman to fix the shower.
As with all Flipbook jobs, your check in time at work is 7am.
Underneath the header, the Flipbook helpfully displayed the weather forecast as well as the indoor climate control setting for my job.
Not bad. Since the garbage sorting job I had paid much more attention to my performance scores day to day and gotten a desk job for a few weeks in a row. Of course, I would prefer to have a job where I could get some air every now and again, but those were few and far between and I needed to exceed expectations by a mile to get that kind of upgrade. I went to the bathroom and peered into the mirror. A black haired, green eyed, freckled face stared back at me. I smiled once with teeth, and once without, to see which looked better on me. I found that varied more than I originally thought, so recently I had been focused on getting that resolved earlier in the day.
Above the front door, as always, was a timer. “Capsule arriving in 60 seconds.” I put on a dark blue turtleneck from the closet and some jeans and opened the door. I did not grow up in the Hive, and having been here for only a few years, the sight was still breathtaking. Makeshift skyscrapers stretched far above and below me, oriented radially outward from the center of gravity in the middle of the ship. Most of the residential towers in the hive were stacked, modular apartments, hastily produced in the decade of construction scrambling when the Ark was constructed. From afar, the Ark looked like an explosion, frozen in place. Between these skyscrapers a tangle of wires were connected, each corresponding to a capsule route. Silently, a glass capsule paused in front of me, and the door slid open. The capsule was only about half full, and people parted to let me enter. Behind me, the door automatically shut, and we were off.
Although humans invented fully autonomous self-driving technology before the Ark was built, the AI systems were not generalizable to be repurposed to the three dimensional structure of the Hive, so the Hive’s internal transport system was essentially analogous to that of a train, with tracks extending to the doorway of each person’s home. From there, people could ride in the train cars, made from a clear glass material to any destination within the Hive. Getting places was slow because of the number of stops, but very predictable, and in a world where everyone’s lives were being exchanged every day, predictability was of the utmost importance. Without a fully predictable transport system, it would not be possible for the workforce in the Hive to reliably arrive at work at 7am, and thus most likely cause many unavoidable performance violations.
Before long, my pod was full, and we were speeding along without stops to the center of the Hive. In contrast to the vast apartment complexes gradually falling into disarray, the business center remained brightly painted and well maintained. As if to make up for the vast sea of oxidizing greys and reds in the rest of the Hive, the business center was a montage of punchy primary colors, standing out even more against the blackness of space beyond. We called it the Rainbow. Entering the Rainbow every day was when I felt the beehive metaphor the strongest — as far as I could see, clear capsules filled with every working age person on the Ark swarmed to their respective garishly colored buildings
The display on my Visor, a corneal implant installed in most Hive workers, awakened. “The next stop is yours, Yasin,” it read. The capsule paused, and I stepped out of it directly into the air conditioned foyer of my workplace for the day. A few others followed me off the capsule. In the lobby, a facial recognition system checked each of our faces, marking us as present for the day. Although I had not had this exact role before, I did recognize the building. The lobby looked almost like that of a bank or train station, with a wide counter beneath an arching marble ceiling. On either side of the mahogany counter were two sealed metal doors with fingerprint sensors. As I approached the door, my Visor alerted me again: “Building restriction: no tailgating.” I waited for the door to seal shut after the person in front of me before scanning my thumbprint. “Welcome, Yasin. Hope you have a productive and fulfilling day today,” said the door.
The lobby may have looked like an old fashioned bank, but the interior was anything but. This was the room where the hardware engineers worked to design and optimize the chips that went into the Hummingbird cargo delivery drones flitting about outside. Even in my parents time in university, electrical engineering was a microscale endeavor, with engineers spending their time hunched over tiny chips and computer screens, trying to squeeze out the final drops of Moore’s law. That changed dramatically with the introduction of quantum transistors, capable of delivering information exponentially more efficiently through superposition states. One huge implication of the introduction of quantum transistors is that chip architectures became much more complicated, and a better interface was needed to design them. Much in the same way that the graphical desktop made file manipulation on personal computers leaps and bounds easier, interactable holographic technology became an essential part of any chip design toolkit. On the Ark, there was exactly one chip manufacturer, Qubex. Qubex’s holographic area resembled the IMAX movie theater domes of old, but scaled up to the size of many football fields. Lining the walls were holographic projectors, maintaining minimal latency holograms of various chip components and architectures below. Scattered around the area were large, house sized virtual models of each chip. Those were mostly for show, but every piece of the model could be cloned and brought back to any individual engineers’ work area if deemed necessary.
The last time I was here, I was on one of the upper floors, maintaining the holographic equipment. It struck me that I probably saw the body I was currently in on the ground floor. Reflexively, I looked up toward the high railings spiraling up the domed ceiling, squinting to catch a glance of the shadowy workers behind the bright spotlights powering the holograms. It was a futile exercise. I was already not very good with faces even as a child, and entering the Flipbook had certainly not made that any easier.
I was thankful to live in an era where chip engineering no longer took place at a desk or cubicle. Every workstation was instead configured more like a woodworking shop, with parts littered everywhere. When I entered my work area, my Visor informed me that my goal for today was to propose a few designs for improving the power efficiency of the collision avoidance subsection. Chip engineering was a tactile experience, and I spent most of my morning trying different configurations of my local architecture, almost as if the pieces were stubborn Legos.