At last, we were at the top of the Marble Falls trail. We’d followed the Sequoia National Park guide to a T, getting up at 3:30 in the morning and driving four hours to reach the park entrance by 8 am, and in return we were blessed with being able to hike all the way to the end without running into a single other person.
All water-related trails in Sequoia are intensely seasonal: waterfalls can be reduced to dry stone depending on the time of year one visits. In our case, the top of the trail was quite pedestrian. A small creek flowed down over a ten-foot cliff into a pool, an oval only about forty feet long and half as wide. The pool was surrounded on all sides by angular pale boulders. Still, the peaceful scene was a welcome respite from the steep climb. We sat and ate peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and marveled at the amount of dirt we’d collected on our socks as small minnows flitted about at the bottom of the clear water.
Once our stomachs were satisfied we began to venture around the area, and I had a moment that I’ll remember for a long, long time. As I walked toward the far end of the pool, it dawned on me that the pool overlooked a deep ravine. I stood at the edge and peered down. The ravine was surrounded on all sides by steep granite, culminating in an emerald pool at the very bottom. Small tributaries flowed down into the pool from multiple unseen water sources. The pool had an austere elegance. Vegetation crept right to the edge of the water, leaving no areas for families to picnic. Rocks in the pool were sharp and would be difficult for any prospective swimmers to clamber onto. In a world surrounded by environments designed for people, it was hard not to find an irresistible charm in a place still to be terraformed.
“Look at that,” was all I could vocalize.
“Yeah, wow. Imagine if we could swim down there,” my friend replied.
We locked eyes for a moment, and an unspoken agreement hung in the air. Let’s see if we can actually find a safe way down.
“At least there aren’t any skeletons down there,” I remarked.
“Maybe they just found a more private place to die.”
Upon further examination, the path down roughly resembled a staircase of huge rocks, with each stair step ranging from what looked like four to six feet in height. It was hard to tell just how large each step was from our view. To make matters worse, the steps were not flat: they slanted severely toward the ravine below.
“Maybe I’ll try just stepping down onto this first step and see if I can make it back up?” I ventured.
“Uh, are you sure? What if you can’t get back up?”
I sat down on the cliff edge and gingerly pressed my foot against a small indent in the rock wall. Despite appearing thin and flaky, it had no give.
“I feel like it will be okay.” I didn’t have much logical reasoning beyond that, and I realized that I wouldn't quite pass the court of judgement if I actually got stuck in the ravine.
“If there were other people down there, I’d 100% say we should go. I just have no idea how we’d get back up.”
“I think this first step will be okay, I’m just going to step down here and let you know what I see for the next step.” I scooted out further and slowly let my weight drop to my feet. Once I was in a roughly standing position on the step, I turned myself toward the cliff face and lightly grasped the rock to prevent myself from leaning back into the ravine. The first step turned out to be about four feet high. “This step is fine, but I still can’t tell how tall the other steps are. If they’re anywhere close to six feet, I’m not sure we can make it up on our own.”
My friend seemed to be looking past me to a step further down the cliff. “Also, the step at the bottom is covered in running water. Would we just slip off of that?”
“Probably.” We considered this for a few more minutes, with my friend sitting on the ledge above me, and me standing on the first step into the ravine. Even in a position of relative safety, I felt the floor slope away beneath my feet, toward oblivion. It felt poetic, in a way, standing in the ravine as we discussed its safety. Sometimes the only way to know if something is safe is to put oneself at risk. Eventually:
“Yeah, let’s not do this.”
“I really wish we could. I think if we went down we’d find some way to make it out, but it would be really scary. Yeah, let’s not.”
“I wish we could too.”
With that, I climbed back onto the ledge, and we sat together again at the top.
Even though many of us have a natural tendency to explore the outdoors, our willingness to do the same with our lifestyles or careers is often much diminished. Why is that? At least among young people, I think it stems from the desire to know everything, to become an expert. Part of that comes from being told what to do by experts all the time. There’s a natural comfort in being an expert, in feeling like one’s understanding of a space is solid, even if it’s not  comprehensive. It’s a bit like sitting in a well-lit cave, where every nook and cranny is illuminated by extensive torchlight. In reality, the path to becoming an expert is not as idyllic as it first seems. A great quote I heard from a friend recently is, “Becoming an expert is knowing more and more about less and less until you know everything about nothing.” There’s a certain boundary that gets drawn as one becomes an expert, a limiting of horizons, an aversion to the darkness beyond the brightly lit cave. As I’ve grown older, I feel more and more that there's beauty in the darkness. There’s a special feeling that only happens when we step into a pitch black, unexplored space, fumbling with our matches and tinder. The feeling of not knowing if something is possible or worthwhile. More and more, I feel that there’s nothing intrinsically scary about that darkness. It’s just not being able to see everything yet, and there is as much peace to be found in that as there is in understanding.
Even though I am now safely sitting on the ledge, I still can’t take my eyes off of the ravine below.
“You’re not still thinking of going down there, are you?” My friend’s voice floats in quietly on the gentle breeze.
“I am.” And I always will be.
