I drummed my fingers against the desk absentmindedly. The status ticker read: 8209348273 / 8374859260 completed. 2 anomalies. 98.0% done. Current SLA status: 7 nines. It had been a boring day, even by the standards of the nearly faultless Capsule Transport System. Today I was a maintenance dispatcher for any issues with the billions of daily capsule rides throughout the Hive. The first anomaly was a relatively common one; the capsule assignment system failed to allocate capsules around the station evenly enough, causing some passengers to wait for pickup longer than expected. It was a kink still being worked out in the system, but for now, required manual smoothing of capsule supply every couple days or so.
The second anomaly was weird. A capsule had stopped in the middle of its route for no apparent reason. The dispatched service workers noted that there was no physical obstacle in front of the capsule, but that the capsule registered there was a blockage anyways. As it turns out, the door to the capsule was also open, and one of the passengers had crawled out and was trying to leap to another track nearby. He was quickly apprehended and brought by the police. It wasn’t clear if the capsule was somehow interfered with, or it was a coincidental event. I wondered if some people were assigned to be criminals to give the police something to do. In either case, since that event, it had been nearly a full workday, and I had nought to do but sit and wait for the day to end.
In front of me was a giant schematic of the capsule routes of the Ark, along with live previews of each capsule as it moved along its track. It was largely an aesthetic display, since there was no way any human could discern anything from the web of lines on the screen. I had to admit it was very aesthetic though. As I waited for the progress bar to fill, my mind floated off.
It had been a month since I met Tamara, and my feeling of familiarity was becoming harder and harder to hold onto. Yet, I felt it was important. The Ark contained over ten billion people, over seven billion of which were part of the Flipbook. On any given day, we could be shuffled to virtually any area of the Ark, a structure nearly a quarter the size of Earth and much more layered. It could be years before I ran into her again, if I ever did. A petition years ago to create a persistent writable memory store in the Cortex was considered too technically difficult to build. That would allow people to write to their memories, a potentially disastrous avenue for hacking. At least, that was what the Council wrote in their press release. It was widely speculated that allowing people to write persistent memories would make the Flipbook system much more difficult to uphold and allow people to establish long running organizations, and that it would be dangerous to do so while the original government members were still alive and well. Because of this, the Council also took down any digital attempts at recording personal memories.
So I was trying an experiment. A few weeks ago, I left work a bit early and took a four hour capsule ride to my kindergarten, which was in a small settlement far from the Hive. It was run by Mrs. Marianne, a cute old lady who certainly would not recognize me now. I hoped my old body contained some objectives to pay her a visit every now and then. Most of the playground outside was just concrete, with some hopscotch and foursquare lines marked. Further in the area was a bark-chipped pit with a swing set, and at the back of the schoolyard was a brick wall designed for wall-ball. I brought with me a small piece of industrial diamond I found on the workbench during the day, and scratched “Tamara?” into one of the bricks in the corner of the wall. I was nervous that the brick would be hard to make a dent in, but under the point of the diamond it came off easily in my hand. I wondered if I should write more, but decided against it. Then I caught the next capsule back home just in time for lights-out.
Since that day, I awoke every day with a start, wondering how close I was to my kindergarten. Today was the first day since then that I had been close enough to visit the wall before nightfall since that expedition. I had already eaten my dinner at work to save time, and as soon as the progress bar hit 100%, I logged off and caught the next capsule going outward. “Level twelve, 92834 Shoreline Ave, please.” As the capsule approached the schoolyard, I found my breath caught in my throat. How thorough were the Nightwatch? Would they come all the way out to Level twelve to inspect a brick wall on a children’s playground? How many people could possibly be staffed on that group?
“This is your stop, Yasin.” I cautiously made my way toward the wall. My heart sunk. The bricks in the wall were brand new, including the corner where I had made my scratches. I fingered the rock in my pocket, considering leaving some more marks, just in case I could sneak something by, but thought better of it. I checked the time. 8:40pm. I had twenty more minutes before I needed to hop on a capsule home. Perhaps I needed to think of some sort of code? Just writing her name out was potentially too obvious. Pink streaks from the sunset began to wink out as the Ark continued its artificial rotation.
On a whim, I called a capsule to the nearest landfill. The facility was already closed for the day, but the fences were climbable. Out in the higher levels of the Ark, buildings had little security. There was nothing much protecting out here but fields and cattle. I made my way around the back to the unprocessed garbage, and as I hoped, there were a small pile of old bricks there. Eight minutes left, plenty of time. I pulled the bricks off the stack, one with each hand at a time, and checked for any markings. About halfway through, I found it. “Tamara?” it asked me. As I held it, I felt grooves on the back of the brick as well. When I turned it over, I gasped. “Yasin,” it read. “You should call the next capsule, Yasin.” My Cortex interrupted.
“Call it.” A two minute timer appeared in the corner of my vision. I tried to climb over the fence one-handed, while holding the brick, but I kept slipping down. Finally, I threw the brick over the fence and climbed over, then picked it up and ran. The ground was uneven, and about halfway to the capsule, I lost my footing and slipped. The brick skidded out of my hand. “23 seconds.” There was no use to the brick anyways, so I just ran for the capsule. As soon as I was inside, I mashed the “GO” button. The sealed air environment of the capsule felt claustrophobic to my gasping lungs. I closed my eyes and tried to slow down my heart.
On my ride back to my home, I could already see the Nightwatch patrols beginning to roam the city. Usually, the sight of those dark bat-like vehicles, attached to the exterior of the walkway paths, sent shivers down my spine, but today I felt only the adrenaline of excitement and hope. As soon as I got home, grabbed my Link, laid in bed, and plugged it in. The familiar darkness took only a moment to overwhelm me. Just in time.
