BEEP BEEP. I snoozed it reflexively. Centuries of technology, and here we were, still getting up to alarm clocks. Opening my eyes was still a nervous process for me, even though it had been a month since the incident that dropped my job tier into the dumps. Literally the dumps, separating garbage into recyclable and non-recyclable. I didn’t even wake up in a bedroom that time, just the couch next to some empty beer bottles. And a hangover. It was an interesting side effect, hangovers. The number of times I woke up with a hangover had to multiplied at least ten times since the Flipbook was put into place. A petition had been opened to transfer physical effects across bodies, but it could be months before that made it into implementation. Still, I tried to avoid subjecting my next body mate to unnecessary suffering in that way.
My conclusion on the alarm clocks were that they were there to enforce a sense of continuity, just like our names, which we retained even though our body switching occasionally moved us into a body with a different gender. At first, it was jarring for me to see a man saunter into the shop with the name “Diane” in pixelated lights on his tag, and I somehow felt bad for him, as if he had been transplanted from his body more than the rest of us. But we were all in the same boat, and that’s how Aamina designed it.
Before even opening my eyes, I liked playing a game: trying to imagine exactly what I would see when I opened them. The housing in the Lithos was composed almost exclusively of giant studio apartment skyscrapers, clustered into residential Hives. Within each apartment the layout was the same, a bed with a nightstand, and beyond, a small oak dining table and a single matching chair. Save for the occasional floral vase or a framed picture hung up on the wall, there were few differences from room to room. From my angle from the bed, I would be able to see the fridge and stove, along with the nightstand. The doors to exit the apartment and enter the bathroom would also be visible, and above the apartment exit door was a large EXIT sign, along with a timer that counted down to the next capsule arrival.
BEEP BEEP. I opened my eyes. There was an extra painting on the wall, and I had forgotten about the Flipbook guide on the nightstand. Oh well. I turned off the alarm, unplugged my Link, and opened the nightstand display. It read:
Your Flipbook assignment for today is drone control firmware engineer.
You have the following objectives:
1. Complete your assigned programming tasks.
2. Give a metrics update to Mary from product.
3. Help your coworker Lucas debug their memory leak issue.
After work, you need to 
1. replenish the groceries in your fridge according to the grocery list there.
2. Clean the bathroom.
3. Call a repairman to fix the shower.
As with all Flipbook jobs, your check in time at work is 8am.
Underneath the header, the Flipbook helpfully displayed the weather forecast as well as the indoor climate control setting for my job.  
Not bad. Since the garbage sorting job I had paid much more attention to my performance scores day to day and gotten a desk job for a few weeks in a row. I went to the bathroom and peered into the mirror. A black haired, green eyed, freckled face stared back at me. I smiled once with teeth, and once without, to see which looked better on me. I found that varied more than I originally thought, so recently I had been focused on getting that resolved earlier in the day.
I pulled open the blinds and peered out. I found that I was on a high floor, it looked like perhaps the 30th or 40th floor, and I could see all the towering apartment buildings around me, stretching upward from the metal ground like a dust-grey, angular forest. The ceiling of the Hive glowed softly, simulating the late fringes of a sunrise turning to day. Across the track I could see blinds from various other windows fluttering open like a thousand tiny eyes. We all woke up at the same time, every day. It helped everything run on time.
As the Flipbook hinted at, the fridge was pretty empty. There was thankfully enough milk in the fridge for a bowl of cereal, and once that was scarfed down, it was time to head out. Five minutes till arrival, the timer blinked. I stepped out into the hallway. I put on a dark blue turtleneck from the closet and some jeans and opened the door. The lobby of my floor was already packed with people, but I managed to squeeze in. “The elevator is starting to descend. Please refrain from opening any doors or windows.” With a rumble, the floor began to shake and I felt my stomach rise for a moment. During the morning rush hour, to accommodate modate the sheer amount of people needing to get to street level at the same time, the entire lobby on each floor converted into an elevator to bring hundreds of people down at a time.
The skyscrapers were arranged around a circular cul de sac like center, from which roads stretched radially outward. From a top-down view, the roads of each Hive appeared like a snowflake, with main roads stretching outward from the center and smaller side roads from those. At street level, we all piled into the capsules assigned to pick up at this apartment. They could arrange and detach from each other flexibly to speed up boarding and deboarding. For our morning pickups, the capsules were arranged like a long series of train cars. I loved looking out the transparent wall of the capsule as we headed into the Hive center station. As far as the eye could see, capsules full of people streamed in from every corner, the edges of the snowflake coalescing in the center. As the capsules arrived in the center, they slid over each other, dismantling the train-like appearance in favor of a giant ball. This allowed the capsule fleet to take up less space in the tunnel system during transit between Hives.
I was about to lay back for a nap when a elderly gentleman interrupted. “Excuse me, is anyone sitting here?” He gestured at the seat beside me.
“Not at all, feel free.” I took a closer glance at him as he put down his bag and took a seat. He was certainly past retirement age, but was still dressed as if he were headed to work. I had never seen it before. “I hope you don’t mind me asking, sir, but are you retired? I’d have thought every retired person would be in the Stratus.”
His features, previously stern, lightened a bit at my question. “Indeed I am retired. I spend most of my days up there, but sometimes I do enjoy coming down and spending some time down in Lithos. Nostalgia, you might say.”
It was hard for me to imagine who would be nostalgic for the Flipbook, but to each their own. “I see. Well, I hope you have a great time down here.” Our housing was strategically positioned near our work, and after only a few minutes, we had arrived at our work Hive. My hive’s capsule ball unraveled, like a ball of yarn, into train form, and we all disembarked. Even after all these years, I still found the work Hives breathtaking. Far from the predictable cookie-cutter buildings of the residential areas, every work Hive I had been in felt different, all formed around the industries and businesses located there. Today’s Hive was shaped like a gigantic terraced hill, with the bottom floor being the largest, and each subsequent floor a bit smaller. It wasn’t the first time I had been here. There were probably a few thousand Hives around the Lithos, so it was a matter of time before any person visited most of them by chance. Crisscrossing up the terrace were a parallel series of escalators for people and cargo. I was on the 8th floor, but I would estimate there were probably 50 layers in the terrace, and the people at the very top looked like ants. The couple of floors were filled with clothing and food shops. I made a mental note to make sure to return and look around before I had to head home.
The display on my Visor, a corneal implant installed in most Hive workers, awakened. “The next floor is yours, Yasin,” it read. I stepped off the escalator and headed into the air conditioned foyer of my workplace for the day. A few others followed me off as well. In the lobby, a facial recognition system checked each of our faces, marking us as present for the day. The lobby looked almost like that of a bank or train station, with a wide counter beneath an arching marble ceiling. On either side of the mahogany counter were two sealed metal doors with fingerprint sensors. As I approached the door, my Visor alerted me again: “Building restriction: no tailgating.” I waited for the door to seal shut after the person in front of me before scanning my thumbprint. “Welcome, Yasin. Hope you have a productive and fulfilling day today,” said the door.
The lobby may have looked like an old fashioned bank, but the interior was anything but. This was the room where the hardware engineers worked to design and optimize the chips that went into the Hummingbird cargo delivery drones flitting about outside. Even in my parents time in university, electrical engineering was a microscale endeavor, with engineers spending their time hunched over tiny chips and computer screens, trying to squeeze out the final drops of Moore’s law. That changed dramatically with the introduction of quantum transistors, capable of delivering information exponentially more efficiently through superposition states. One huge implication of the introduction of quantum transistors is that chip architectures became much more complicated, and a better interface was needed to design them. Much in the same way that the graphical desktop made file manipulation on personal computers leaps and bounds easier, interactable holographic technology became an essential part of any chip design toolkit. On the Ark, there was exactly one chip manufacturer, Qubex. Qubex’s holographic area resembled the IMAX movie theater domes of old, but scaled up to the size of many football fields. Lining the walls were holographic projectors, maintaining minimal latency holograms of various chip components and architectures below. Scattered around the area were large, house sized virtual models of each chip. Those were mostly for show, but every piece of the model could be cloned and brought back to any individual engineers’ work area if deemed necessary.
The last time I was here, I was on one of the upper floors, maintaining the holographic equipment. It struck me that I probably saw the body I was currently in on the ground floor. Reflexively, I looked up toward the high railings spiraling up the domed ceiling, squinting to catch a glance of the shadowy workers behind the bright spotlights powering the holograms. It was a futile exercise. I was already not very good with faces even as a child, and entering the Flipbook had certainly not made that any easier.
I was thankful to live in an era where chip engineering no longer took place at a desk or cubicle. Every workstation was instead configured more like a woodworking shop, with parts littered everywhere. When I entered my work area, my Visor informed me that my goal for today was to propose a few designs for improving the power efficiency of the collision avoidance subsection. I looked at the various tubes and wiring in front of me, and weighed each in my hand. Even though they were virtual objects, the feeling of cool, dense silicon was generated by my Cortex, the chip implanted into every member of the Flipbook. It was what enabled the separation of skills and personality, of muscle memory and emotional memory. I patted my head gratefully. The Cortex was a previously forbidden piece of technology, I had learned during my youth classes, that was only available to the extremely wealthy for entertainment purposes. It seemed incredible that every Flipbook member had access to it, automatically implanted at the young age of ten. The Cortex was the hardware upon which the Flipbook software could run.
Looking down at the layout of the components at my feet, I recognized some of the patterns as legacy transistor architectures that had been obsoleted in a research paper from last week, and by updating those to the state of the art designs, I was able to squeeze out a few percentage points of power efficiency. Chip engineering was a tactile experience, and I spent most of my morning trying different configurations of my local architecture, almost as if the pieces were stubborn Legos. When my Visor alerted me that my lunch break was here, I still sat amid a pile of parts strewn about the pristine mirrored floor. “Would you like to eat in the cafeteria or have your food delivered here?”
“Delivered,” I said. The menu floated in front of me, and I poked at the words “Carne asada burrito”. The menu floated away and I saw an order progress bar, letting me know my order would be arriving in five minutes. I always had my food delivered when I had the option. I didn’t see much point in idle chatter with coworkers I would probably not see again, and certainly not in the same bodies. Instead, I read the latest Flipbook update releases.
“We’re considering adding nutritional value guidelines to the daily objectives,” it read. “Please leave any comments you have below, we look forward to hearing your feedback.”
There were over a million comments. Everyone read the Flipbook updates.
“I don’t get why the Flipbook team thinks we don’t need some space in our lives outside of work to enjoy ourselves,” one comment read. “I think this makes a lot of sense, it’s unfair for some of us to pay for the poor dietary decisions of others,” said another. There were few updates that were not tremendously controversial, but I saw all the debate and controversy as a breath of fresh air. It felt like as long as there was discussion, it meant people cared about making the Flipbook better. Which made sense, because it was our whole lives now.
A Hummingbird dropped my burrito in front of me and I munched on it while scrolling through the rest of the update feed. I wondered if I might not be able to indulge in cheesy, oily burritos for much longer, and ate it a little slower, savoring each bite. Then, it was back to work.
===
“Hey, thanks so much Yasin, I couldn’t have done it without your help,” Lucas called gratefully after me. Debugging always took longer than expected, and the light glowing through the front doors was tinged with red.
“No problem, my pleasure.” I asked the front desk to clock me out, and stepped out into grainy air of the Hive. The ceiling was dimming rapidly. When I squinted, I could just barely make out the seams between the gigantic ceramic plates that made up the exterior shell of our chambers. I wondered about the number of people who must have been down here constructing these homes, these industries, replicating all of existence hundreds of meters below the surface. It was always hard to wrap my head around.
“Grocery store, please.” Most people on the Ark simply had groceries delivered to their homes, but I couldn’t shake the feeling of browsing actual shelves. It was a practice I started a few years ago, to remind myself that I was a different person, in a different place, every day. I think I would go crazy if I just saw the same couple digital Cortex displays, and they just had slightly different words on them. Sometimes, people did go crazy. Most of the people going down the escalators streamed back into the waiting capsule train, but I paused on the second floor terrace to browse around.
There were several large commercial chain grocery stores on this level, but the one that caught my eye was a hole-in-the-wall affair, sandwiched between two imposing business centers. There were few customers inside. The Ark contained no large grocery stores, like the Costcos back on Planet Earth. A vast majority of the food was stored in large central distribution warehouses, and delivered directly to people’s residences. The few grocery stores that remained were much like this one, containing the bare minimum of each item on the shelves and needing to be constantly restocked from the central foodstore. Today, the tomato shelf was empty. I approached the only employee in the store. Her name tag was a different color than mine, glowing with blue light to my red. Here on the Ark, different colors indicated different types of professions. I still hadn’t committed the meanings of the colors to memory. Her name tag read: Tamara.
“Excuse me Tamara, I was wondering if you knew if there were any tomatoes in stock?” There was no such thing as in stock, as any grocery store could replenish near immediately from the central food store, but I preferred to imagine otherwise. She understood.
“Let me check our back room and let you know.” As the door to the storage area clicked shut behind her, I felt a sense of deja vu. Something about this place, maybe the smell? I breathed in deeply and looked around in more detail. An old analog sign hung above each shelf, stating “Produce” or “Poultry” or “Frozen foods”. My Cortex overlaid my vision with the locations of all my foods in the store. I turned off the display. Nothing jogged my memory.
“It’s your lucky day, I found some in the back!” Tamara’s cheerful voice jolted me. “Here you are.” 
“Thanks a bunch.” I received the box of tomatoes from her. I couldn’t shake the feeling of unease that had set in since I arrived here, but time was wasting, so I turned my Cortex back on and quickly gathered the rest of my goods. There was no need for currency in the Flipbook since the system was aware of all resource allocations, so I made my way to the door. “Have a great night!”
She looked up from her counter briefly. “You as well, Yasin.” I stepped back outside and headed down the escalators to the waiting capsules. As I turned back to enter my home address, I saw Tamara standing on the second floor terrace, looking at me. Her eyebrows were wrinkled with confusion. Before I could react, my capsule sped off.
=====
I glanced at my time display. 9:42pm. I liked to go for long walks near my place of residence each night, to see if I could understand anything about the person I was assigned to be, before I was whisked off into the algorithmic shuffler. Most of my fellow residents were tucked back in their apartments. Because the Lithos was contained entirely underground, the nights very quickly became pitch black. Streetlights illuminated the snowflake streets. They didn’t bother to put in artificial stars into the ceilings. No one looked up anyways. I was on the lookout for a park that my Cortex informed me was a couple blocks away.
“Do you remember any interactions I’ve had with anyone named Tamara before?” I asked my Cortex as I walked.
Instantly, it replied. “You have not had any interactions with anyone named Tamara before.”
My Cortex was an all-knowing piece of equipment. It saw everything I saw, with more perfect memory and knowledge and understanding powered by all the content on the internet. There were countless instances where I had been wrong and my Cortex had corrected me. Yet, I knew in this moment, my Cortex was wrong. I ran the name over and over in my head as I walked.
When I returned to my apartment, it was only twenty minutes before plug-in at 11. It was an innocuous time, but failing to plug in opened up a scary world of the Nightwatch, which I hoped never to interact with. I half-heartedly mopped up the bathroom, and with my final 5 minutes, I left the next inhabitant a note:
“Good morning!
Whoever you are, I hope you’re able to get up on the right side of the bed today and have a great one. I’m rooting for you!
~ Yasin, your previous inhabitant”
I was almost certain the Nightwatch cleaned up any attempts at communication across consciousnesses, but it made me feel happy to think the notes would actually go through, and I had no way of knowing one way or the other. Thus far, no one had stopped me on the street to say thanks for the note, and perhaps no one ever would, but I left a note every night just the same.
10:59pm. My alarm clock blinked angrily at me. I hopped into bed and tapped the Link to the external port of the Cortex at the top of my head. It magnetized into place, and I laid there, watching the clock.
11:00pm. My vision switched off, like a light.
