A notification from the Screen Time app slid down, showing my weekly stats and gently reminding me that I used my phone 13% more this week than last week. This feature, initially an interesting neutral window into my digital behavior, has gradually become an uncanny measure of my unhappiness. When the day comes when we can plug probes into our brains to measure our happiness, I wouldn't be too surprised if the most correlated metric I have is Screen Time. Reflecting on my worst Screen Time weeks, I found that the worst weeks were not those with emotionally disastrous events. Rather, they were weeks with a dozen small pinpricks, of plans being cancelled or embarrassing myself in work slack, of not being able to sleep because of noise or forgetting to pick up eggs at the grocery store.
So why are large emotional burdens seemingly easier to bear? An analogous scenario is that of deciding to go to the doctor. When we're really sick, it's a no-brainer to schedule an appointment, or even call 911, and in most cases, we can then be treated and feel better. But those nagging back pains or coughs, flying just under the radar of being worth a visit to the clinic, are the ones that can indicate some sort of underlying serious illness. In that way, the weeks with the many pinpricks became just as taxing as the emotional disaster weeks, but with none of the catharsis of venting to a friend and shouldering the burden as a team.
The threshold for "going to the doctor" emotionally is wildly different among different people, but regardless of where it is, there will always be smaller pinpricks. Emotionally challenging solitary weeks are thus largely unavoidable (unless you live in Disneyland or something), and that brings us to compartmentalization. When the emotional funk hits, we all have a decision to make; do we put it in a box (or more aptly, a pressure cooker) and go about our day, or do we wallow in it? The ability of some people to put incredible amounts of emotional stress in enclosed mental spaces is very impressive, and there are certainly circumstances where there is no other option, but most people would probably agree that running away from emotional problems will not solve them.
So that leaves wallowing, which leads me to sitting and binge watching YouTube for hours on end. It's a bit of a paradox. How can we mentally allow ourselves to embrace and be impacted by this solitary stress while still moving toward the long term baseline of being productive and happy? This is where I think a different kind of compartmentalization becomes useful: time compartmentalization. Time compartmentalization is the concept of shortening our lifespans all the way down to a single day. No more long term projects, or weight loss plans, or midlife crises. It's the idea that we wake up in the morning, and our entire existence takes place in that time before we sleep. The next day, a new person wakes up and lives out their day.
As weird as this may sound, there is actually some theoretical basis for this perspective. To understand how this works, let's consider the construction of a teleporter. The first thing to consider is that true teleportation is impossible; nothing can move faster than the speed of light (based on our current understanding). So how might we move something at the speed of light? Atoms won't do; they have mass and thus can only move strictly at the speed of light. In order to make this work, we could build a device that instead disassembled the atoms at a particular location, beamed the information to another device using light, and that other device could use atoms in its vicinity to reconstruct the disassembled object. All of a sudden, with this theoretical teleporter, I could send someone across the country a toaster at the speed of light, assuming they have enough atoms in their device.
The question then is, if I teleport myself with the device, is the person who comes out on the other end still me? The answer to this question becomes more clear if we consider an instance where the teleporter doesn't quite get the job done, beaming the information for the reconstruction of my atoms without disassembling me first. I can quite safely say that if someone were to then approach me and ask if I would be disassembled, because I had already been teleported, that would not feel like teleportation. It would clearly be death. At the same time, the teleported version of me is also certain that they are me. Their reconstructed atoms form neurons with a memory of entering the teleporter and magically appearing on the other side. They have memories of my childhood friends and of my parents, along with the same dreams and desires as me. But clearly, they are wrong.
The reason something as basic as identity starts getting fuzzy here is because of a break in consciousness. Teleportation temporarily causes me not to exist, and even though I am restored fully to my original self, I can't be sure if I'm truly who I was before.
As it turns out, we don't have teleporters (yet), but on a normal day, all of us will endure an extended break in consciousness at least once: sleep. And when we wake up each morning, there is theoretically no way to tell if we actually lived out our lives before this point, or if we were just constructed with a certain set of memories in our bed right before waking up.
The teleporter problem isn't new, and there are already a lot of great explanations of it (if you're interested, check out "The Trouble with Transporters" on YouTube). Clearly, this way of thinking is pretty unsettling most of the time, and it certainly doesn't help on a sleepless night (apologies for anyone reading this at night!). It might motivate, in extreme cases, behavior like Hwang's in the short story "Hwang's Billion Brilliant Daughters" by Alice Sola Kim where he stays up for days on end on precious days he didn't want to let go of.
But the teleporter problem isn't all bad; it also allows us to view life as less of a solitary trek and as more of a relay race. To achieve our long term goals, we need to live each day in a way that allows us to pass the baton to the next edition of us that gets up the next day and keeps on moving. Feeling as if we're pushing a team forward can also create a sense of accountability and motivation that is difficult to create on our own. Thinking in this way also helps us avoid continuously pushing off our own happiness to the future, a place we will never experience, something that Tim Urban eloquently explains in his post "Life is a Picture, But You Live in a Pixel".
From my perspective, the teleporter problem, and thus time compartmentalization, also helps me strike the balance between the necessity of spending quality time with our demons without getting sucked into spirals of self-destructive behavior. I can allow myself to be unproductive, to rest, and to heal, because I am not alone; I am part of a team of tens of thousands of people who can pick up my slack and who share the same goals as me. I'm sure that all of those later relay runners patiently waiting for their turn, will not concern themselves with the occasional teammate who had to pause to nurse an injury. They'll run their single, sixteen hour race as fast as they can, pass the baton along, and join the uncountable number of people in the audience cheering on the runners still on the track, and that's all I can really ask for.